Uh welcome back everybody. This is the
last lecture of the 2026 um
instantiation of statistical rethinking.
Here in the experience section there I
took a poll um and I got a number of
responses from people and the overlap
was in more time series modeling. Uh and
one category of that is hidden marov
models. So that's what we're going to
try to do today. This is going to
overlap with some of the previous
material in in themes like measurement
error and the like but there'll be some
new mechanics and computational tools I
can teach you as well. Remind you uh of
the part of the workflow where we have
done most of the action in this course
and how it's going to relate to the
topic today. On the left you have just
the the very left hand side of this core
basian workflow I've been showing you
and I augmented it in the last I don't
know three four lectures with
measurement models. We've been dealing a
lot more explicitly with measurement
models not just what nature does which
is the generative model right nature
does stuff whether we observe it or not
uh things happen. uh then we observe
those things through a process called
measurement. And often we ignore that,
right? We teach we treat our
measurements as if they were delivered
by angels on golden platters or
something. But sometimes and sometimes
you can do that. Sometimes you can
safely ignore measurement error or just
assign a sigma to it or something like
that and get away with it. But often you
cannot because there is differential
measurement error or um response biases
uh patterns and missing uh data that are
related to the measurements themselves.
Um I gave you a really protracted
example with sensoring remember of a
case where you really cannot ignore the
missingness because you will get a
systematic bias in an infinite sample. S
increasing sample size doesn't fix these
problems. And so we spend time modeling
measurement as well. And we're going to
do that today too. Um this is the hidden
marov models state-based models are
about measurement um as as well as about
the generative processes. And the the
idealized problem we deal with in these
latent state and and hidden markoff
models is a case where there's some
cause of interest X and it's
unobservable. It's a latent state. It
could be an internal state of an
organism. Uh it could be an
institutional configuration. Um it could
be a macroeconomic state. There's all
kinds of interesting things like that
where the causes of interest are in
principle not detect not directly
measurable but they exist. Yeah. That
makes life fun. Uh there are things that
we could in principle observe and these
are the y's. Um
and the x's influence the y's and the
x's influence one another through time.
Um the y's are influenced by the x and
they can influence one another. I'm
going to give you examples, subject
matter examples of this as we go
forward. I just want to get the
abstraction across to you now. Um, and
then there's measurement on top of this
because it very often we can't observe
the wise either. We can only get proxies
of them. The um links hair differential
equation example. Was that the previous
lecture? Yeah, last one we did. That's
an example of this in continuous time.
Uh, we don't know how many links and
hair there are in the can in Canada.
Right? Nobody does. What we do know is
how many pelts were reported, right? And
so that's that's the Y stars up top. But
I hope I convinced you that with some
strong and biologically reasonable
assumptions, you can infer uh Y's and
X's um from imperfect measurements like
Y stars in many cases. And these things
are in principle all examples of what
we're going to call hidden Marov models.
I'm going to work up to it though. Um I
want to divide this lecture in two
halves with two examples. Uh first all
these models are called latent state
models. The causes of interest are
latent states the x's. Um and to first
order approximation the entire universe
can be modeled this way. Right? Just
about everything can be modeled this
way. So every uh every model we've done
you could consider it a latent state
model of some kind. Um I want to do two
examples to build up the complexity. The
first is not a time series and I'm going
to use this example to introduce you to
modeling latent states without the
complexity of dealing with sequences of
unobservable latent states which adds
more computational complexity. So just a
just a cross-sectional latent state
model in the context of strategic
learning which I know some of you in the
in my department work on and uh so this
will be this will be useful uh for for
stuff you're working on I hope. uh and
then I'm going to put a time series and
embed the latent state model in a time
series. It'll become a genuine hidden
markoff model, a very prototypical
example. And this is an example I made
up and yet it's real
and we will build a basian latent state
model of whether the president is dead.
Um
okay,
so yeah, work hard for you. I make these
new slides all the time. This is um all
right. So the first one this uh uh this
example is a reanalysis of a published
data set from this 2018 paper citation
on the bottom. Um this is a child
development experiment where children
interacted with um a constructed box
which looks something like this. This is
an image from the paper of of their
drawing of what the box is. Children
were given a ball and they would come up
and put the ball in one of the tubes.
They pick one of the colors and put the
ball in the tube and then the box would
dispense a toy. And the uh choice thing
g the choice given to the the um uh the
children was uh after they see other
children put balls in the different
colors, which color did they choose? So
it's a social learning experiment. And
in particular, this is, you know, these
are developmental psychologists, so
everything's counterbalanced in all
kinds of ways. Um
uh the main kind of treatment is to say
uh there are um each each participant
child is going to observe four other
children interact with the box before
they make their own choice. So at the
top are the first three and each of them
chooses the same color. The color is
different in different trials and this
is what's called the majority choice. So
in this example it's red, right? So
three kids choose red. maybe not all
following one another, right? But um and
then there's a third uh child, this is
the child at the bottom, who chooses
three times
a different color.
Uh why three times? Because you want to
be able to say whether the the fourth
child, who's the the choice that we're
trying to model, is influenced by number
of demonstrations. So the the red is
chosen three times and the the yellow is
chosen three times here, but one's a
majority of children,
right? But each of them has been chosen
the same number of times. Does that make
sense? You're trying to distinguish
between choice choice uh huristics. Um
and then blue, poor, sad, blue is
unchosen. And and now the fourth child
is free to choose any of the three. uh
and they did choose uh all of all of the
others were chosen by some kids about
600 kids participated in this uh seven
different places um and there in the
paper they analyze it by age and
location and a bunch of stuff I just
want to focus on what the relationship
between choice patterns and the
strategies um so the the motivation for
this experiment is do children copy the
majority uh if so how does it develop
across age uh and Does that pattern vary
by culture? The problem is you can't see
strategy. It's a question about
strategy. The est demand is how are
children choosing? Do they follow the
majority? Right? Do they follow the
minority? Are they simply choosing a
color at random, right? There's a bunch
of things they could be doing, but you
can't observe that. And the experiment
is not designed to reveal that in any
transparent way. There's an X here, uh,
and what we observe is a Y. the the
estimates about the x's. Does that make
sense? I'm going to model this up though
explicitly.
But the basic inferial problem and this
is common of all research. It's not
unique to this study by any means. Uh
I've done research on social learning
myself. It's all we always have this
problem. The thing you want to estimate
is not directly revealed by choices, but
it is a function of choices and and
different learning strategies can
produce the same choices at different
rates in the same treatment. Yeah.
Um so those of us who who do empirical
game theory uh like I used to maybe I I
will once again this is the basic
inferial problem we deal with when we do
game theory experiments and this this is
a game theoretic experiment. Is the
basic problem clear? Yeah. Um
in the paper they uh ignore this problem
unfortunately which is why I decided to
reanalyze it. So what did they do? They
just use the the color that was chosen
um the color that was chosen by the
majority indicates majority pre
preference and that's the way they do
all the analyses and about 2thirds of
kids across all the sites and ages um
chose the majority uh color in their
from their particular trial. Um and then
there's just social information use
which is the sum of majority choice and
minority choice. So, or there's the
frequency who chose the unchosen color.
So, one minus that is taken to be social
information use. But I hope I've
convinced you this is not right. Yeah,
these are choices, but they're not
strategies. Uh and and the paper
conflates the two. So, what would we do
instead? Well, we do a latent state
model. Uh that's what we do. So, let me
show you how that would be done. Well,
here's the basic problem. majority
choices consistent with with many
different possible strategies. And uh in
this uh experiment, I think it's simple
enough that there's not a huge range of
potential strategies, but nevertheless,
I could come up with like five different
ones that I'm going to talk about. Um
you could choose a random color, in
which case a third of the time you make
the same choice as the majority, right?
Um, you can choose a random demonstrator
and then three4s of the time you will
choose the same thing. But you're not
following majority choice. You're just
picking a kid at random because you like
their bracelet,
right? Something like that. It's what
I'd do. Yeah, nice bracelet. I'm
following you sort of thing. Um, a
random demonstration and then half the
time because remember there's six
demonstrations and three of them are for
the majority choice. Uh, so what could
we do instead? Uh this is a case again I
I can't leave the workflow alone for
very long. I have to put it in front of
you. Let's come back to the workflow
diagram. Something I haven't emphasized
yet in this course and I wanted to sneak
it in at the end out of guilt uh is the
idea that we can use the generative
models and estimates to think about
design as well. In all the examples so
far, I've treated data sets like they're
delivered to you by by DHL or something
and you had nothing to do with them.
Yeah. But I that's not how your research
goes, right? Yeah, hopefully you have
some role in planning data collection at
least sometimes. There's some looks on
faces in the audience, right? I know
some of you do this. This is like 80% of
your time is collecting data. Yeah. So,
uh we can use these tools also to do
design work so that we get data sets
that have good information on uh and
match the statistical models as well.
And that's what I want to think about
here. It's too late for this experiment,
but I'm going to have some we're just
going to reanalyze it, but I'm going to
have some suggestions as we move forward
about what to do. Um, first thing we
want to do is think about a generative
model just to illustrate the point. It's
a simple simulation to illustrate what
I'm trying to convince you of. So,
imagine there's a hundred kids in this
simple R script. Um, we're going to
um say that half of them choose a random
color. These are the Y1s. They're just
picking a color from one to three.
um that's half of the kids in over two.
So that we just sampling one of the
colors at random and then half of them
the other half follow the majority and
that's what the Y2s are and the majority
color here is two just in this example
to make it simple. uh what we observe in
this experiment the Y1's and Y2s are
mixed together and they cannot be
distinguished and that's what the my
lovely bar chart is supposed to
illustrate is that the red bar is high
but it's it's composed of unlike things
right different strategies
now hopefully this is super clear um so
let's consider some other strategies and
do this computationally now uh we want
to infer the unobserved strategy of each
child
in this case children don't have um I
don't think any child was was tested
more than once and so there's really no
hope to make an inference about any
individual child but we can make
inferences about the proportions of
strategies in all the kids does that
make sense um if you wanted to design
this for individual kids you need to do
you need to do repeat observations on
individual kids but there's still
information here about the mix of
strategies in the population so that's
where we're going to focus instead and
I'm going to consider a strategy space
which just comes from nothing but my
feral imagination.
You could add your own uh to this but I
don't think these are ridiculous
hypotheses. Yeah, none of them involve
consulting a horoscope or something like
that. Right. They're they're things like
first one is uh the focus of the paper
itself majority choice. They also
consider minority choice. There are
people each of us probably has someone
in our friend network who always wants
to do uh the opposite of what everyone
else is doing. Right? This would be the
majority choice or strate minority
choice or three which I call maverick.
This is the person who says well no one
chose poor blue I will choose blue. Yeah
we all know that person too. Yeah
question.
>> Um do they argue that the point of the
minority choice could also be this girl
is up to something. She keeps making the
same choice.
>> She misunderstand something.
>> That's not
>> yeah it's that's that's that would be
another heruristic right. Another way
you could choose it. And we need a new
another experiment to distinguish that,
right? Because in this
>> I don't know if that was what they were.
>> No, there were they're just
counterbalancing the number of choices,
right? Because there was previous
research there's that this the paper I'm
talking about here like all papers is is
part of a tradition. And so there are
previous ones where um the minority
choice was just done once and then the
argument was oh this is confounded with
the number of demonstrations and kids
might just be using the number of
demonstrations like they've seen the
color chosen so many times and that
reinforces it and so this this
experiment was designed to address that
but then that creates another compound.
Yeah. So there's no perfect there's no
single experiment which will deal with
all that. So, I don't want to uh focus
on that too much, but yeah, but that's
that could be that could be true in this
case. And we can't say if it's
different. We just have minority color.
And if we say there's a a strategy which
is choosing uh the color that the fewest
number of kids chose, then it would also
choose that color. But there's another
one which would be um yeah different
than that, right? which is the the fact
that that single person has chosen it
three times is a better indication of
their preference than the individual
kids who chose each one once, right? If
you're like it's an enthusiasm index or
something. Yeah, exactly. It makes total
sense, you know. Um
Yeah. Good.
Yeah. Um fourth is just a random color.
uh the four the you know the you have to
picture in this experiment remember
there's a participant child who's
watching the other uh what a video
actually of four kids uh choose and then
they're asked to choose and they could
just be ignoring the video right and
then just waiting they're just waiting
for you to stop talking grown-up let me
put the ball in the box right and then
they just choose their favorite color
yeah um and I'm going to call that
random color and then the fifth one uh
is one that the researchers were
concerned about is which color was
chosen first. So these things are
counterbalanced. There's a bunch of
different videos they recorded. Um and
sometimes the um unchosen color comes
first and sometimes the majority color
comes first and sometimes the minority
color comes first, but that's coded in
the data set which one came first. And
so it could just be that the kids only
pay attention to the first
demonstration. And so we want to test
for that as well. Okay, does that make
sense? So you can think of others and I
will show you some code that you can
expand and you can add more strategies
into this as you like. Okay. Uh I have
done experiments in game theory which
are like this but uh have a time series
embedded in them and then the strategy
space gets even bigger because people
have memory and they can use past
choices to do updating right and then
their strategic settings and the
strategy space can be fairly big.
>> Good. Yeah. Is that a question Jeeoff?
Yeah,
>> I assume this is going to a mixture
model. Yeah.
>> Is that where it's going?
>> It is. Yes, it is going to a mixture
model. That is right.
>> Sometimes sometimes in these strategies
what we're trying to estimate is we're
trying to estimate population level
things like marginal rate of
substitution.
>> For example,
>> the economist speaks.
My question is like how much power are
we losing when you have the initial
filter basically choosing the
probability that a strategy is chosen
and then you basically lose that
additional I presume we lose that
additional information that basically
feeds into the parameter estimation on
in any particular strategy space.
>> Let me I I I think I think this is a
good question. uh and and sorry the
microphone's not picking it up but we'll
come back to this. Um let me present the
model structure and then you can ask it
in terms of the parameters labels that I
choose and and then we can make some
sense out of it. So uh this is a
categorical model
um uh each on each trial there's one
choice and there are three options. So
we've got a three option categorical
model. It's like a Bernoli choice model
but there's three options now. Yeah. Um
and uh theta is a probability vector um
that tells you the probability of each
choice on trial I uh and the labels I'm
choosing here is that label one means
the unchosen color, two means the
majority color and three means the
minority color. These are behaviors.
These are not strategies. Right? That's
the whole motivation here. Uh all the
action comes into modeling theta. So uh
theta for choice J where J is one two or
three um is going to be uh big angry
sigma right which you remember means
some right I'm sorry this this tight
face it looks big and angry it looks
really I you know it should be nicer
looking it looks very very uh bow house
uh so um we're going to sum over
strategies s and there are five
strategies in this example So we sum
over all the strategies and the first
thing in each term in the sum is the
prior probability of that strategy. So
this means we're we're averaging. So
this is the mixture model. Yeah. Um
times the uh probability of observing
that choice conditional on that
strategy. So we don't know the strategy
the child used but we have prior
probabilities and we can computationally
make a prediction for each strategy of
what a child following that strategy
would do in each case. So we average
over them. Why? Because that is the only
legal thing to do in probability theory
when you are uncertain. Yeah. You have
to do this by the by the axioms. You the
axioms compel you. So we say in in Baye
Church. Yeah. uh if you accept the
axioms you must accept this computation.
Yeah, but does it make sense? Uh it says
we we don't know which strategy there is
but we have priors the P subs.
Yeah, I'm going to set them equal across
the strategies but I'll show you that on
the next slide. But if you had other
information you could weight them
differently. And so once you have prior
probabilities and you can compute the
likelihood that's the big PR Y equals J
conditional on S, then you average
across. And this is what uh and Jeff
asked this with his question. This is
what's called a mixture model.
Yeah. Does that make sense? Okay. Um and
then the last thing is we need prior
probability. And so we have this vector
P of length five. And uh P is a is a
probability. So we want a probability
distribution for probabilities. I'll say
that again. We want a P is a
probability. Each element of P is a
probability. So we're going to set a
prior on it. So the distribution needs
to be a probability distribution from
probabilities.
Yeah. So it's those you remember exhibit
from MTV's Pimp My Ride. It's like, "Yo,
dog, I heard you like probabilities. I
put probabilities in your
probabilities." No. Know what? That's
the 90s.
Um Okay. No. So in this case, there's a
very good choice. um uh the the deer
clay distribution which is the um
multi-dimensional higher dimensional uh
generalization of the beta distribution
right you may know the beta distribution
probably distribution for a single
probability
the der clay is the generalization of
that or you might say that the beta is
the special case of the der clay for one
dimension
yeah
um and like the beta it the the deer
clay is parameter ized by pseudo
successes, right? This vector of counts
which are the number of prior successes
for each one or observations for each
one. It's the same way the beta is
parameterized. The alpha and beta the
the alpha and beta parameters in the
beta distribution are pseudo heads or
whatever you're counting heads and
tails. They're the the prior outcomes of
each category. So here I set it to four
each, which is low amounts of evidence
that all of them happen. If you made
those counts really big, like a hundred
each, that would be a prior probability
that they're all really the same. Uh,
this is weak evidence that they're all
existing, but it doesn't say they're all
the same with any confidence because the
counts are low. Uh, there's a a
discussion of this in the book in
um I think the ordered categories. It
showed the deer clay shows up in the
book when I teach ordered predictors.
And I think there's a bunch of stuff
about how they work and some examples in
in that chapter if you want to look and
see. Um but sorry I didn't have time to
put it in this lecture. I I there's just
not enough time to do it in an hour with
all of that. Um
okay, good.
Yeah, we're happy. There's some there's
some mildly pleased faces in the
audience. Yes. Is this good? Um all
right, let's look at some stand code.
All right. Uh I think if I really wanted
to, I could do this in Ulong. Um, but
it's the last lecture, so let's do some
raw stan. Yeah. And for these models,
you're going to be so much happier if
you just work in raw stan or pimc or
Julia or whatever. Uh, because you've
just got so much more freedom to just
directly express the log probability and
and not fight with abbreviated formula
interfaces. Um, so let's do that. So
just keeping the mathematical formula on
the right to remind you what it is. Um,
I'm going to walk you through some of
the aspects of this code. Not all of it.
uh you don't have to be a Stan pro to to
see what the relevant issues are here.
Um you know Stan has these blocks at the
top. We declare observed variables
called data. Then we declare unobserved
variables called parameters. And then we
have this big chunk of code called model
which just computes the log probability
of all the observed variables. Yeah. Um
so the first thing to see we've got this
y's at the top.
um just a vector of observations uh for
all from all the trials and remember y
can take the value one two or three
um
p is uh a vector probabilities the
there's a special data type called a
simplex for this a simplex is a vector
that sums to one
right because these are prob the whole
they're probabilities of the strategies
right so that's what we want to get
we're going to do inference on this
simplex for the population of kids who
did the experiment
So, we're going to have a prior on P,
but it's going to get updated by the
choices. We're not going to be able to
say what any particular child did
um with certainty, although there is
information about that. You could you
could compute it post sampling, right?
There's certainly strategies that could
be eliminated for a particular child.
Yeah. Um but we what we're the target of
inference here in the simplex is the
mixture in the population,
which is not useless. Yeah. Um let's
look at the calculations now. Um at the
very top of the model block, I declare a
vector of length five for theta j. This
is just a little working variable that
lets me compute the elements of theta j
that are there on the right, right?
Because we're going to sum over them.
And here's the deer clay prior.
Um and then here's some very ugly code
that does all the hard work. So this is
like a multiplechoice model. Uh all
that's going on here is we loop over
children one to n and then we start
building up the elements of theta j all
this stuff on the right over there right
each of the elements each of the terms
inside the sum is what we're going to
calculate we've already got the p subs
but we need these probabilities of y
equals j conditional on s right
you with me yeah uh so we do this for
each of them I just make an empty theta
j vector
full of zeros and then I say if the
choice equals um two uh
uh we go through each of the things. So
the majority choice if the choice equals
two then the probability um majority
conditional on majority remember
conditioning on the strategy. to the
first line then it's uh with probability
one because two is coded in the data set
as the majority choice in the raw data
otherwise it's zero but zero is the
default in the vector I've already
initialized that at the top and then the
next one for minority choice if the
observed choice was the minority one
number three um uh then the minority
strategy would would do that 100% of the
time probability equals one uh then the
maverick strategy which chooses the
unchosen that was coded is number one
here. Um, and then we've got the random
color which is always a third for any
choice. Do you see that? Theta subj4=
1 over 3.
Yeah. With decimals in it because
otherwise Stan courses it to an integer
and we don't want that.
Sorry. Math in the computer is not real
math. You just have to deal with these
these monsters like this. Um,
and then the follow first strategy. uh
similar logic. If they if they chose the
first one, then this strategy would do
that 100% of the time. Otherwise, uh um
it it depends upon whether the first
matched uh
don't know what that code is doing
actually, but it's the right way to do
majority first. It's explained in the
book. Sorry, I I I don't remember why
it's that way. Um majority first equals
one.
Yeah. Then if you the choices too. Oh,
it's because um what the first one was
is either the majority or the minority
choice. And this is just picking out
which of those it was on this trial.
That's what it's doing. It's just the
way it's coded. Okay. Um and then we've
got to combine all these. So we've got
each of those terms that's in the sum
here and we need to add them together.
So the first thing we do is we need to
multiply each of them by the prior
probability. So this is what happens
here. We loop over each strategy s and
we get the log I'm doing this on the log
scale because that's the way you want to
do it. Um we get the log uh of the prior
probability plus the log of the of the
probability of the data. Right? Because
on the log scale probabilities add
rather than multiply. Good so far. So
now we've got the log um probability or
the log of each each side of that sum.
And now we need to add them together.
And we use this uh little helper thing
called log sum x which uh some of you
are unfortunately already familiar with.
This is yes I see pain faces in the
audience. Um I'm not going to take the
time today to explain this because I
have a lot of content. But I have in a
previously recorded lecture a whole
bonus section about this from the 2023
lectures. And I I don't remember which
course it was. Um uh but there's a bonus
section at the end which is all about
functions like this and why we use them.
They exist for numerical stability of
floating point arithmetic is why they
exist. Uh this gives us the log of the
sum of a bunch of terms that we
exponentiate. So we put in it a bunch of
log probabilities and it's going to
return the the log of the sum of their
exponents which is what we want. Does
that make sense? It just it's log some
exponent. It's honest. It tells you who
it is. It tells you what it does. Um,
it's nice and it's just a numeric. You
always want to use this when you're
constructing probability averages like
this in a computer. Otherwise, you can
get what's called catastrophic
underflow, which is no fun.
Yeah. Okay. I'm happy to talk more about
this with with anybody uh after the
lecture, but um uh it's very good
practice and I wanted to have an example
of doing this. Um, I had a colleague who
once wrote to me because they were
literally doing a strategy latent
strategy model like this and they did
not do this and they couldn't understand
why their code was working because all
their probabilities were zero
and it's because they were doing
everything on the raw probability scale
and it was a time series with like
hundreds of choices and so any part any
sufficiently long time series the
probability will approach zero. Yeah,
because any particular data set is
highly unlikely in a big probability
space. And then floating point
arithmetic, you start multiplying tiny
numbers together and eventually it
rounds to zero. This is the reason we do
things on the log scale. So I rewrote
their code. Cody and I rewrote their
code. Actually, Cody's not here, but
some you people know who Cody is. Cody
and I rewrote their code. So it works
now. So that's uh why I wanted to tell
you this. Now if you ever find yourself
in this situation, use log some exponent
or ask me or Cody. Okay, that's that's
your heristic. Good. All right. Was this
a fun tour through Stan Code? Did you
enjoy the ride? Yes. Isn't it soothing?
I was I've been told multiple times that
my colleagues like to watch me write
Stan Code because it's like watching
your friend play a video game. I've been
told. The world's most boring video
game. But uh there you have it. Okay.
Inference happens. Um here are the
marginal posterior distributions of the
elements of theta uh for majority
choice, minority, maverick, random color
and follow the first demonstration.
See that um there's uncertainty about
each of these uh but these are a lot
lower than the um original. So focus on
the top line majority the posterior
means around 0.25. Remember the the raw
empirical frequency of majority choice
is about 2/3.
Right? So this is substantially less
evidence. Um uh and for social
information use overall as well much
lower choice. This with these kinds of
of posterior distributions um what you
miss in this marginal display are the
correlations. Uh and and I don't know if
there's really a good way to deal with
that. But of course you know me I made
an animation. So there's an animation of
these posterior distributions. So um
here are three uh uh uh at the same time
each of the colors is just different
draws from the posterior and then each
of them is animating between sequential
draws from the posterior to show you the
correlations in them because as some of
them go up then the others have to go
down. Right? It's a simplex. That's the
problem. So there's always strong
posterior correlations uh in in vectors
like this. Um, color is the most
uncertain because it's pos it's capable
of explaining the whole data set by
itself. None of the others are. Yeah,
all the kids could just be choosing
their favorite colors. This cannot be
eliminated, but it's not very confident
that that's true. It could also be that
none of them are, and that's why the
color one swings around the most. Um,
majority is uh fairly stable uh as a as
a credible heristic for some fraction of
the kids, but it's it's about 0.25 25
here is the central area, not 2/3 or or
about 6 instead. Um, of course, these
probabilities depend upon how many
strategies you consider. Uh, so you you
always need some scientific background
to decide which ones to to put in here.
Does this make some sense? Is this good?
And I'm I'm not endorsing animations
like this is the ideal way to view this,
but it's it's just a it's a very
difficult thing when you're doing
inference on a simplex uh to think about
the the how the the error bars are
co-varying across the elements. It's a
it's a complicated problem. Okay, let me
try to summarize a bit and then move on
to the second example. Um so this is an
example of what I would call a
state-based model. We have hidden states
which are the hypotheses that are meant
to explain the data. inference about
them is possible at least in the right
design. Uh it helps if you consider the
inferial problem when doing the design.
Uh that was not done in this case
unfortunately but this I was about to
say I don't want to single this paper
out but I already have it's too late but
no there are lots of papers that make
this mistake right and so that's the
reason I I want to have an example of
it. a better design that would be able
to distinguish majority influence choice
from some of the others. You'd vary the
size of the majority and there are
experiments that have done that. Yeah.
Uh but that would be a way to do it. I'm
not sure if kids would be tolerant of
more complicated designs. So you have to
make you have to make compromises when
you do child development studies though.
What's the general lesson? uh what we
want are latent states but uh what we
have are emissions and you should not
confuse them but use the measurement
model write down the measurement model
put it into the into the statistical
model. Um so this sets up the second
half in the second example where we take
a latent state model like the previous
example and we embedded in a time
series. So now you can imagine you had a
series of choices from the same kids.
Yeah. You could also imagine that their
strategies might change from time to
time, right? Do you always use the same
strategy for making choices? Don't
answer out loud, but probably not. So,
uh, uh, these types of models are called
hidden markoff models. Um, uh, what does
that mean? Hidden, it just refers to the
latent states. In general, latent states
can be continuous or discrete. I'm going
to use a discrete example because I want
to show you the simplest structural
example. then we can think it through.
And also I've already done a continuous
time uh hidden markoff model. That was
the links hair model was a continuous
time hidden markoff model. I just didn't
tell you. Usually when you hear hidden
markoff model people are thinking about
discrete time but that's actually there
are many examples where it's continuous
time. Um marov just means memoryless. Uh
it's named after a Russian mathematician
but
now this is his name. It just means
memoryless unfortunately. But um Andre
uh uh what's it? Andre Marov Marovich I
think was his name and did a bunch of
important work in probability theory and
um Marov processes named after him
because he studied them are memoryless
in the sense that only the current state
of the system influences the future
dynamics. And when you think about that
that's not a strong assumption. That's
just how we study physics, right? Things
that happened in the distant past can
only affect the future through the
present. That's a marov assumption. Does
that make sense? Should I say that
again? Things that happened in the
distant past can only affect the future
through the present. That's a Markoff
process. I'm I'm happy with that. In
fact, I'm very unhappy with models that
violate the Marov assumption. Right? If
something that happened a hundred years
ago can't have direct psychic influence
on current events. Yeah. So lag models
do that. Um I complained about those at
the end of the linkshair model. Right?
So there's lots of modeling that uses
like time lags. Lag minus one, lag minus
two, lag minus three and you put them in
as predictors. Uh that is not a causal
model. It can't be because there's
nothing that happened three years ago
that influences what happens next year
except through the current state of the
system. Yeah. Which doesn't mean you can
make prediction models with lag
variables, but they're not they don't
have any causal interpretation. Okay,
that's my rant about Marov. Marov's
great. Obey Marov. Um, and then model.
It's it's a model. I didn't know what
else to do here and it was late and I
was on cold medication. So, I thought of
craft. It's just you say the word model.
That's what I think of immediately
starts playing in my head. Yeah.
Yeah. Okay. Somebody knows this. There's
like two people, three people. It's
classic music, people. This is You
should know it. Um, all right. Just some
examples. Uh there's a huge range of
examples. Uh hidden marov models are
workhorse uh frameworks in a bunch of
different fields. Uh animal movement um
uh molecular biology
many of the standard elements of
molecular biology workars workflows are
hidden markoff models sequence alignment
protein structure all those things are
cases where there's hidden alignments.
Right? So you think about a protein the
thing that selection cares about or
function cares about is its shape. And
the shape can be realized through
different sequences. Yeah, you can make
changes in the amino acids and has no no
effect on the function. Um uh game
theory uh inferring strategies. That was
the first example in this lecture. Um I
have a colleague who works on stellar
flare inference and and uses hidden
marov models uh on this as well. Um
where the emissions are light curves and
the latent state is whether the star is
flaring. You might think it's direct,
but telescopes as good as they are.
Yeah, these are these things are far
away. Um, uh, neuroscience, activation
patterns, you want to infer cognitive
states. Uh, there's telemetry like
planes and missiles. Uh, you and
delivery vehicles that have GPS signals
on them. The atmosphere is your enemy.
Uh, you can't pinpoint where the thing
is. There's a there's a hidden Marov
model doing inference to tell the uh,
vehicle where it actually is.
um uh human kinship inference, social
networks, public polling, speech
recognition. When your computer listens
to you or when you do optical character
recognition on scanned text, uh it's a
hidden markoff model. It's using the
sequence of inferred words to do error
correction.
Yeah, it's not doing it token by token.
It's modeling the underlying true tokens
given the corrupted signal that's been
received. You do a you do something like
this when you just decode human speech
as well, right? Because literally people
mumble.
Yeah. And but you string it together
because you're reconstructing the
sequence of states. At least something
like that. Yeah. But that's definitely
what your computer does when when you
dictate to it and it it makes text.
Okay, I've got 20 minutes. I think I can
do this. Um so let's do a a latent state
markoff model now. And in this there are
three subm models to attend to. And
that's the way I'm going to order my
presentation. There's the state
transition model for the X's, which is
the true state that either we want to
infer it or we want to infer the
processes that switch the states. I'm
going to give you my my example in a
moment. Uh there's the emi what's called
the emission model which produces the
y's. The y's are emissions of the states
x. These are in principle observable,
but in many cases they're also hidden.
um uh and all we actually get to see is
some corruption of the true state. And
this could be because there's data
coding. So like if you're doing
behavioral observations, you're not
getting the actual behavior. You're
getting someone's judgment of the
behavior. Usually a poorly paid
undergraduate.
Yes.
Not to say that professors would do it
better, but but somebody created that
data coding and there may be errors in
it, right? which is why lots of behavior
fields you use multiple observers and
you calculate agreement. Yeah. But let's
just say in principle Y star you always
get Y star. Um does that make sense?
Okay. Uh the example I want to use I was
thinking hard about something that would
capture your imaginations and and also
be a simple model so I could show you
all the core mechanics of a hidden
markoff model and this is what I came up
with and I'm sorry but this is based on
a true story. Um, this is is the
president dead? In August of last year,
there was a it was Labor Day weekend.
Um, the internet went crazy with rumors
that Trump had died. Does anyone
remember this? Yes. Okay. Heads are
nodding. All right. I didn't hallucinate
this. Right. And and uh the inference
arose intuitively because he's a very
public person. Yeah. And um but there
was a a sequence of days going on a week
where he had made no public appearances,
even canceled scheduled appearances, was
not posting on social media, which is
odd. So he sometimes posts hundreds of
times a day. Yeah, it's very odd. Um and
let's face it, is an old dude. So your
prior probability is, you know,
factoring in here, too. Uh so lots of
people were were sure this was was the
case. Um
and uh so if we're going to be good
basians, how would we approach this
problem? And I'm going to teach you
how to be a basian internet conspiracy
theorist. Yeah,
we're going to use a hidden maroff
model. In fact, this is the classic
structure for it. And uh this is not
silly because this has a very similar
structure to a real serious body of
statistical modeling and ecology called
capture recapture which is how animal
surveys are done right how you infer the
demographic processes and densities of
animal populations because you can't
sample them all right and you don't need
to um so this is not silly and in the
code I have a a full capture recapture
basian model that I coded for you that
you can use with animal survey data. Um,
okay. Let me explain the transition
model for X. Now, what is X? Live or
dead? Right? These are the two states.
There may be other states,
transcendental,
you know, um, whatever. But I'm going to
keep the model simple. We've got two
states, alive and dead. We want to infer
the state and when it switches. And I
hope you engage your imaginations.
There's lots of time series processes
where there's some underlying causes
that are driving things you can observe
in a population and you want to know
when the process switches. Yeah, this is
one of you asked me about this and this
is why I thought about this. Um, and so
here's one way you can you can do it.
You can do inference on the sequence of
X's. Uh, to do this we make up a model
for X we create something called a
transition matrix. Um, and this is
usually called gamma. And that's so I'll
try to stick with the conventions here.
And the elements of gamma are the
probabilities of switching from row to
column
and each time period. So when we look at
gamma on the lower left of this slide um
the first row is alive and the first
column is alive. The second row is dead
and the first and the second column is
dead. So the upper left cell which is
row one column one is the probability of
switching to alive to alive otherwise
staying alive.
Yeah. Which is large. At
least for big mammals like usually.
Yeah. Um, row one, column two is the
probability of dying.
Row two, column one is the probability
of resurrection.
Yes. Which I assert is zero in this
analysis. See, this is why prior
probability is fine, right? We're going
to put priors on these things. The
probability of resurrection is low. It
doesn't have to be zero, but I'm going
to set a really low prior on it. Yeah,
depending upon your belief system, it's
happened once or twice, right?
Uh, and then 22 is the probability of
staying dead. And I'm going to put a
really high prior on that. Okay, does
that make sense? So, let's convert it.
Um, I'm going to use one parameter for
this whole matrix. You can do
generalized hidden marov inference with
a free parameter in every part of that
matrix. you can uh it's it's possible if
the if you've got enough data um but we
don't need to do that here because we
have strong priors on what the meaning
is of each of these probabilities. I
only need one parameter. I'm going to
call it f because it's one of my
favorite Greek letters and after theta
and
right the line just goes the other way
but it's a Greek person is going to send
me hate mail for this but uh so one
minus fee is the probability of staying
alive and fe is the probability of dying
and uh death is death is uh
non-reversible is what we'd call it in
the mathematical literature in this okay
does this make sense That's our
transition model. Um, so that gives us a
model for the x's at the bottom of this
uh of this deck. Um,
what about the emissions? Uh, I'm going
to assume that each hidden state, alive
or dead, has its own probability theta,
theta sub one when you're alive and
theta sub 2 when you're dead, of a
public appearance.
And I don't have to set theta sub 2 to
zero exactly. Uh, but I'm going to set
it low. Uh, why might it not be exactly
zero? Because dead people have been
known to make public appearances. So,
this is a movie. Some of you will know
this movie, but Weekend at Bernies. No.
Okay. A few people. Thank you. See, um,
but uh during the actual uh Labor Day
weekend excitement, is President Trump
dead? There was a single social media
post that that came from his account
towards the end of it, and all it said
was, "I'm doing fine." which is exactly
the kind of statement that is like
sounds really sketchy like who's got his
phone right um kind of situation. So
theta 2 is not zero. Uh right you have
to deal with the issue of hoaxing there.
Theta 1 um depends upon how public the
person is right the president in
question. If how how often do they
appear every day? Is it only once a
week? And that matters and we're going
to do inference on theta 1 as well as
part of this. But that's that's the y
model. Um,
oh, oh, and in this case, I'm going go I
go straight to the Y stars here because
the theta 1 theta twos are like the
product of an actual public appearance
and that you've heard about it,
right? Because there's also the
reception part in YAR. It's what you
hear about because you're doing the
inference, right? He may he may have
made a public appearance at a golf
course and you didn't hear about it.
Yeah. And that was I think that also
happened during this that turns out in
hindsight there really was a public
appearance. he appeared at at some
dinner or something, but it wasn't
reported in the press and so people
didn't know it happened. Okay, let's
compute
um a little bit of probability notation
here. So um
uh the thing we want is the uh in
general is the probability of of yar and
the x's conditional on the parameters.
Right? This would be the data model and
we're going to use bay theorem to invert
that and do inference on the parameters
you know but that just requires priors
that's how B theorem also always works
the same way and in principle we can
just write this down it's just the
product over all of the time periods
every day we're going to use day as our
time period here we have observations
did he make a public appearance on day
one on day two on day three so those are
the y's is there a public appearance so
we need the product over all of the data
of the y's conditional on the state the
true state which is not known right
that's the x subt and the parameter
theta which is the probability of making
a public appearance
times the prior probability of the state
right which is the probability of x subt
conditional on the previous state which
is the markoff assumption
that's the top formula here does the
logic make sense right this is the
markoff assumption for for the emission
model
um this uh you need some strategy to
compute this thing. Um in principle what
we want to do is you can imagine every
sequence of x's that could have
happened. Now in this model it's fairly
simple because death is non-reversible
right but in a general marov model all
the states can be reversed to other
states uh possibly maybe you have some
absorbing state that makes it easier but
there will be lots of sequences of x
which are possible and could in
principle explain the data and we need
to average all of them average over all
of them to marginalize out the x's. So
you could just do this brute force. You
could write down for all of the say if
you've got 10 days in the whole data
sequence. I'm going to use more in my
example, but if you had 10 days, um he
could have died on any of the days and
those are all the possible sequences of
X's. In a generalized hidden markoff
model, there would be many many more
sequences because you're wandering
between all the different states over
all of those 10 days. Does that make
sense? Yeah. And then for each of the
each of those possible sequences, you
just need to compute the probability of
all of the Y stars conditioning on that
sequence. And then you've got a prior
probability for that sequence because
you've got the Markoff assumption and
you've got the gamma transition states.
So you can do the computation. It's just
straightforward probability theory as
always. Uh now we never do this what I
just described to you because it takes
too long. Uh you could do it in this
one. You could brute force it because
death is non-reversible. So there aren't
that many sequences of X's but in a
general Markoff model you can have 10
latent states right I mean the so you
get this geometric explosion of possible
sequences and you don't want to do
calculations that grow in geometric time
you really don't. Luckily there's this
algorithm called the forward algorithm
which is much more efficient because it
uses the marovian assumption to do
conditioning. So it doesn't have to
recomputee terms across sequences.
there's a bunch of the same terms across
them. That's what you want to do. Um,
and this algorithm is built into Stan,
so you don't even have to write it. U,
but you could write it. It's not that
long. It's just a It's a bunch of nested
loops and it's about, I don't know,
seven lines of code. Uh, you can look it
up. It's used all the time. Um, that's
what you want to do is not brute force
it. Okay. I think we've got some time to
go through some more stand code. Yes.
Enthusiasm. Okay. Good acting. Yeah. Um
uh again we've got stand code. So
there's data declared at the top. Um
we've got the number of days that uh
over the interval we're going to make
inferences. Uh the president could have
died on any of those days. Um we've got
uh I I declare an integer k which is the
number of states just to show you the
generality of the model. You could add
states to this. Um number one's going to
be alive, number two is dead. And then
there's an array of length n which is
our emissions. These are our y stars
because they're they're public
appearances that we have recorded on any
particular day. And I'm just making it
one and zero. You could generalize this
model to counts.
Yeah, it could be a plus variable. Yeah,
but I just want to do something simple
and binary for you to make it make it
clear what's going on. Okay. And then in
the parameters we've got f and theta and
that's it because f is our whole
transition matrix because there's just
the probability of dying. Um and then
the there's two thetas one for each
state. Probability you make an
appearance when you're alive and the
probability you make an appearance when
you're dead. We're going to put priors
on those. Okay. And then in um I I
construct gamma.
This is just a bunch of index fiddling
right in programming. I declare a matrix
gamma that's k by k and then I fill in
its entries.
Good. So now we've got gamma. Um it's
not beautiful code, but at least you can
read it. Yeah, you know what's going on.
Um and then I'm going to compute all the
terms we need to do the forward
algorithm. And that means we're the log
likelihood of each poss of of the data
in each state. So for each Y for each
state that that the president could have
been in on the day that the Y was
observed. This is a straightforward
calculation. It's just the Bernoli uh of
Y in um conditional in that particular
the theta for that state. So you see I'm
looping over observations and I'm
looping over states and I construct a
matrix of log probabilities for each Y
for each possible state.
So that's the emission model. Yeah.
We haven't done probabilities of states
yet. That's where the forward algorithm
comes in next. And then we get the model
block. Um I set some priors. Um and I've
already justified those. I think yeah,
death is nonreversible. But
nevertheless, I reserve a small
probability that the president makes a
dead president makes an appearance in
the weekend. Bernie's sort of scenario.
Um and then we update the target by
calling this helper function called hmm
marginal which is just a a function in
stand that does the forward algorithm
and the the arguments it needs are that
big matrix which is called log omega.
It's a matrix across observations and
across states. So the probability of
each observation conditional on each
state. The the forward algorithm uses
those components to build the
probabilities for each possible path
through all the states. Um then it needs
the transition matrix gamma and it needs
a vector row which are the initial
states and those can be parameters if
you don't know the initial state. Here I
assert he was alive on on the at the
beginning of the time series. Okay that
is an assumption but we don't have to do
inference on row in this case but in
general you can because you don't know
the initial states. Does this make
sense? And that's that's uh plain
vanilla hidden marov model at the very
bottom.
Um
we have some other helper functions
which do posterior simulations on the
latent states. So sometimes that's the
target of your inference. Yeah. Like in
this case we want to know what day he
died on. We want to know the probability
on each day that he was dead. And that's
what I'm going to plot for you in a
moment. Okay. But we compute that in
generated quantities at the bottom
because the the forward algorithm
marginalizes over all the possible
states. But once we've got posterior
probabilities for the thetas and for
fee, we can compute from that the
probability at any particular day that
the president was in any particular
state.
Yeah. Does that make sense? And and
again there are some nice helper
functions for this but there's an
algorithm uh to do these computations.
Just uses B theorem. Yeah. Okay. You
ready to move on? Are you excited to see
when the president died? Uh, so I have
to construct some I'm gonna if
maybe next year I'll get the real news
reports for this historical anecdote and
we can condition on a real data set. Um,
and that would be fun. But uh, I just
made up some data for this example. So
here's a simulation from an imaginary
president who makes a lot of public
appearances. Yeah. And so this is a
two-month uh period in the simulation.
And the y-axis here is just 01 made a
public appearance on that day, at least
one public appearance. And then there's
a vertical dash line there when this
simulated president passed away. Um and
no appearances happen after that. Now
your your goal is to figure out when um
he died. Uh and so we can run the the
model that I just presented. And on
here, we're getting the posterior
probabilities. um of the prob posterior
probability the president was dead on
any particular day in the sequence. And
you'll see it's nearly zero, not exactly
zero, but nearly zero for most of the
sequence. But it goes up before he dies.
And you can see why because he didn't
make an appearance the day before he
died.
Yeah.
So it goes up early. Um and then it it's
very confident after a while because
this president this hypothetical
president was making a lot of public
appearances and so when he suddenly
stops
you become the rational basian observer
should become quite sure something has
happened and that's what happens in this
simulation. Does this make sense? Um we
can change the simulation to a shy
president who does not make nearly as
many public appearances.
Yeah. And in that case, the model is way
less excited by a string of of lack of
public appearances.
But again, notice that the probability
rises before the death
because that's rational. You're not
sure. Yeah, presumably, you know, later
on there'll be a public announcement of
when it actually happened in this case.
Um, but as I keep telling you, this is a
model is a serious model structure
that's used in um in ecological surveys
called capture recapture or mark
recapture. The goal is to infer
demographic processes in wild animal
populations usually. Uh so you're using
very incomplete subsamples of the animal
population often done with traps. These
safe traps like I found a picture of one
on top. Um if you've ever seen these
sort of things uh these are the animals
are released from these things. You put
the traps out uh at dusk. You get up
really really early and empty them.
Yeah. Um so the animals don't starve.
Um, and but you mark them, you tag them,
and then when you capture the same
animal again, you know it's the same
animal, right? So that's why it's called
capture recapture.
Um, you can do in the old days it was
banding. Now we microchip them. So
they're a bunch of wild animals with
microchips. Uh, and the data structure
is similar. It's just there's a bunch of
presidents, right? And we're inferring
for each of them when they died. So like
there was some rat you keep seeing and
now you never see that rat anymore. Is
that rat dead?
Yeah, but the the we don't maybe don't
maybe you care about that rat. Uh maybe
you don't. But the inference is usually
about the demographic processes in the
population like mortality rates,
fertility rates, migration rates, and
you can also estimate the number of
unique individuals this way without ever
having to count them all. So you can
apply models like this to things like
there's uh a coffee shop, a cafe, um and
you want to know how many unique patrons
there are. Well, you do capture
recapture on who's there every
afternoon. And you can estimate the
unique number of customers that way. So
the same model structure. Does that make
sense? So this is a real workhorse
thing. There's whole books about capture
recapture, a bunch of statistical
packages for it and so on. And I gave
you a stand implementation a
generalization of the dead president
model that works for this for simulates
multiple presidents and we do inference
on all of them. So we can estimate
mortality rates is the idea just as an
example, but it's in the script uh in
the script folder on the website. Okay,
that's the content I wanted to get
across. Uh um so there's continuous
time. These discrete time models are
fine as long as all the intervals are
the same length. When they're not, you
need to have some continuous time
representation underneath because states
can be reversible in general in models.
Um but that's fine. You use ODEs and
I've already showed you an example of
that. And you can simulate from ODEs
with an algorithm called the Gillespie
algorithm. You can look it up or if any
of you ever need something like this,
come to I'll teach it to you. It's real
easy to do. You can do um stocastic
simulations from continuous time
processes with it. It's it's a great
thing. I wish I had more time. I would
do an example for you. Um and yes, this
is what all of us look like when we're
learning differential equations. It's
difficult. Be easy on yourself. Okay,
I've gone a little bit over. Will you
indulge me just within a couple minutes
of of recap here? I want to come back to
the workflow
and and help you think about this whole
course in terms of this basian workflow
which is a way for you to do quality
assurance on your science and do better
science. But I think it's also a way for
you to read papers. Yeah, you should be
reading other people's papers and trying
to figure out what their workflow was.
Logical workflow like not what they
actually did but how it would be
justified logically which is what this
workflow is about. So here's my
abbreviated version. We've got estims,
that's Q for question, and we've got
generative models with a G. And we're
going to construct these with some
explicit logic into estimators that have
some hope of answering the particular
questions. Right? We've done a ton of
this. Most of the work in this course
has been this. Yeah. In every example,
I've started with an estimated and
degenerative model, at least one, and
we've had some process, hopefully a
credible process for producing an
estimator. Um and then we've often done
testing using synthetic data before real
data ever enters into it. We simulate
synthetic data from the generative model
and we do tests on the estimator. We uh
we do prior predictive checks because
remember the prior is a thing you add
when you make the statistical model.
There's no priors in nature at least in
my basianism. Yeah, I don't know about
other other basians but for me
I'd also think this is true of aveter
and Andrew Gellman who are the basians I
know the best. None of us believe that
nature has prior, right? So we're
information theoretic people and uh
they're going to listen to this lecture
and disagree with me probably, but but
um no, so the priors are a thing that's
not in our generative model in our
workflow, but it's in the stat model and
they do useful things for us, but we
have to do checks on them. Yeah. To make
sure that they they fit our scientific
knowledge. And then we do simulation
based validation on synthetic data sets
to uh validate that the estimator is
functioning. Not just the logic of it,
but that we coded it correctly, right?
Because we all make mistakes. Yeah. So,
I think this testing step is really
essential here. And it'd be nice if
think about what you want from your
colleagues. You want them to say, "Yes,
I tested it." Yeah. So, that's what they
want from you. Yeah. Or this is what
they should want from you. I don't know
if they do. Um
uh then we combine the stats model or
models with uh data and we get things
called estimates. And again there's
testing to do. There are diagnostics on
the estimates. So um diagnostics on the
algorithm you use to do the
approximation. Almost all statistical
algorithms give you approximations of
the posterior distribution or if you're
doing frequentist inference you're
getting an approximation a large a large
sample approximation usually an asmtoic
approximation and you need to make sure
those algorithms are working. There are
things called diagnostics and I I spend
a lot of time harassing you about R
hats. Yeah. Um, and then there's other
things, sensitivity tests, calibration
checks, which are also ways just to make
sure that the machine functioned and and
give you ability to test if the model's
working well on this data or if it's
misspecified. And this is this is where
you discover things like that in this
part of it. Um, things I haven't said
enough about and I feel guilty about is
on the data side, you should be testing
data too. Um, there are protocols for
data curation. It'd be really you can
think of that as part of testing, right?
Is the data managed in a messy Excel
spreadsheet where they've used color as
data and things like that? If so, this
lowers your confidence, right? But you
can also do you have a data dictionary?
Do you use the data dictionary to do
error checking? Right? So a data d a
good data dictionary will contain
information about the valid contents of
each variable and you can use that to
check the data. I have done this many
times and I have always found mistakes
in the data sets that I have gotten.
Impossible families. I have an
anthropologist. Uh we find lots of data
sets where children are older than their
parents. Why? Because people made a
typo. Yeah. Or there's a copy paste
mistake or something. Got to scan for
mistakes. And then we go back to the raw
forms and we fix it. But you have to
find these things by checking against
the data dictionary. I think and I
apologize for not having examples of
that in here, but this is not really
like a general data science course and I
have to draw the line someplace. But I
spend 80% of my statistical modeling
time on the data. Yeah. 20% of the time
fighting with Stan. So the the 80%
deserves more attention and I apologize
that I haven't given it to you. Um
finally uh we we need to lift the
estimates the posterior distributions to
the target of inference which is going
to be some set of causal contrasts or a
set of forecasts or predictions and that
requires introducing additional
information about say the the the
stratification of the population where
the causal effect where the causal
interventions are being imagined. Yeah.
So if you're doing work with humans it's
age distributions things like that. Uh
but whatever it is, there's usually a
separate set of simulations you need to
do and then construct contrast to get
effect sizes. Yeah. Um it's only in in
perfectly linear models that you can go
straight from a beta coefficient to a
causal effect. Yeah. And even then,
sometimes you can't do it. But in any
time series, you won't be able to do it.
We were talking about time series this
week. Um because the causal effect will
unfold over time and the treatment might
be applied in every time period,
right?
And so the act the causal effect is
complicated. And so when you think about
what's the causal effect in a time
series, that's a simulation, right? And
then you need to think about the
population structure. Does that make
sense? Yeah. Um and there are tests to
do here too on uh making sure that the
simulation works and the sensitivity to
the the new assumptions that you're
making when you generate these
predictions. Okay, that's my sermon
about this strange thing. Um and I I'll
leave you with this final slide. I call
all of this now gorilla workflow. Uh you
have to defend yourself against a
hostile and overwhelming scientific
literature. Yeah. But you are a lone uh
uh embattled
individual, a gorilla warrior and a
frontal assault on the scientific
literature is hopeless. You will be
overwhelmed. Yes. Um do not stand in
front of the tank. Okay. Instead, choose
your battles wisely. And the workflow is
is a weapon that lets you dissect the
complexity of the scientific literature
and protect yourself against false
beliefs. Uh so that's the way I think of
it. That's how I've tried to develop it.
Uh and I hope it proves to be of some
use to you. Thank you for your
attention. I hope you enjoyed the
course.